INTRODUCTION
Ad valorem platform fees which depend positively on transaction prices are widely used in practice. Well-known examples include online marketplaces (such as Amazon and eBay), payment card platforms (such as Visa, MasterCard and American Express), and hotel booking platforms (such as Booking.com and Expedia). In these cases platforms typically charge sellers percentage fees, as well as sometimes small fixed per-transaction fees. Platform costs, which are largely fixed or dependent on the number (rather than the value) of transactions cannot explain the levels of ad valorem fees set by these platforms. This has led to criticisms of the ad valorem fee structure, given it is not cost reflective. In this paper, we explore whether such ad valorem fees harm welfare, and so whether there may be a case for banning them.

Concerns over the use of ad valorem fees have been raised in the context of payment card platforms. Merchants and policymakers point out that debit and prepaid card transactions do not provide credit or float and bear very small fraud risk; therefore, they do not warrant a percentage-based fee structure. For instance, Summers [2012] criticizes that

Payment schemes’ owners and infrastructure operators also have monopoly power that can be used to set prices far above their production cost. There is abundant evidence of clearing and settlement pricing that is based not on production cost but on methods designed to extract very high returns for use of the infrastructure. Perhaps the most prominent example is ad valorem pricing for payment methods that essentially involve giving bank account holders direct access to their deposits and that do not entail bank credit, as in the case of debit cards. The Canadian Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce [June, 2009] made the following ruling:

The Committee believes that there is little rationale for percentage-based interchange, merchant discount and switch fees on debit cards, since this payment method involves a relatively simple and nearly instantaneous transfer of funds. There is no obvious credit risk and no interest-free period to fund in these transfers....The Committee believes that debit card transactions are inherently less risky and costly than credit card transactions; consequently, they do not warrant a percentage-based fee structure, whether at the level of interchange fees or switch fees.

To address this issue we make use of the model we developed in Wang and Wright [2017] in which a profit maximizing platform designs its fee structure to take into account heterogeneity in demand across the many products sold over its platform. The key idea captured by the model is that when a market involves many different goods that vary widely in their costs and values that may not be directly observable, then ad valorem fees and taxes represent an efficient form of price discrimination because the value of a transaction is plausibly proportional to the cost of the good traded. The model implies that the profit maximizing fee structure is affine (consisting of a percentage fee plus a fixed per-transaction component) if and only if the demand faced by sellers belongs to the generalized Pareto class that features constant curvature of inverse demand (which includes linear demand, constant-elasticity demand, and exponential demand as special cases). This matches the fee structure used by many platforms, as shown in Table I below. According to the model, the fixed per-transaction component is present only because the platform incurs a marginal cost for processing each transaction; otherwise a simple percentage fee would be profit maximizing. In Wang and Wright [2017] we used the model to show that ad valorem fees should also be used by an authority that wants to regulate a platform’s fees while allowing for the recovery of a certain amount of revenue (e.g., to cover the platform’s fixed costs). In contrast, in this paper we investigate a different issue: What would happen if a policymaker banned a platform’s use of any fee that depended on the value of transactions (i.e., ad valorem fees) but left the level of the platform’s fees unregulated. For policymakers who want platform fees to be determined on the basis of costs but are concerned about directly regulating fee levels, this seems to be a natural approach to consider. However, we show that the welfare results are not at all obvious, and are related to the long-standing debate on the welfare effects of third-degree price discrimination.

To address this question, we first show that the conditions for welfare to increase as a result of banning the use of ad valorem fees turn out to be the same as those which determine whether banning a monopolist from using third-degree price discrimination improves welfare, in which each good traded is treated as a separate observable market over which the monopolist can price. This allows us to draw on the substantial literature on monopolistic third-degree price discrimination (e.g., see Aguirre et al. [2010], for a recent analysis). In the setting usually adopted for price discrimination studies, in which there are only two markets, we find welfare is generally higher when platforms are allowed to use ad valorem fees given our demand class. Specifically, welfare is higher whenever demand is exponential or log-convex within the generalized Pareto class, and also when demand is log-concave within this class provided the two goods are sufficiently dispersed in terms of costs and values.

The intuition for the above results is as follows. For two goods that have very different costs/values, a monopoly platform that can only set a uniform fee will set the fee very close to the monopoly fee for the high-value good, almost eliminating the sale of the low-value good. This is what happens with exponential and log-convex demand. For log-concave demand there is a choke price, so the uniform fee will be set at the monopoly fee level for the high-value good with the low-value good not being traded at all. In these cases, allowing the platform to price discriminate has little (if any) negative effect on the high-value good but expands output a lot for the low-value good, meaning price discrimination increases welfare.

For two goods that are moderately dispersed in costs/values, a similar intuition applies but the extent to which it holds depends on the log-convexity of demand. We show for such cases, that welfare is still higher under price discrimination when demand is exponential or log-convex, but this need not be the case when demand is log-concave. This reflects that the more log-convex is demand, the closer the uniform fee gets to the monopoly fee for the high-value good. Finally, when the two goods are close in costs/values, we link our result to Proposition 5 of Aguirre et al. [2010]. They show when demands in two markets are sufficiently close, price discrimination increases welfare when demand is log-convex and decreases welfare when demand is log-concave. We show that these results can be extended to a setting with a continuum of goods, for which the costs and values are drawn from a uniform distribution. In real-world settings, however, platforms handle the trade of many different goods, and the distribution of prices and sales of these goods will typically be highly skewed. Analytical results in such cases are not possible. We therefore use information on the actual distribution of prices and sales measures for two different platforms (Amazon’s and Visa’s), as well as their fee structures, to calibrate our model. We find, in most cases, welfare would be harmed if ad valorem fees were banned. Our results therefore imply policymakers should be cautious about banning the use of ad valorem fees.

Shy and Wang [2011] also look at the welfare effects of a platform shifting from a fixed per-transaction fee to an ad valorem fee. They consider a setting with a monopoly platform and imperfectly competitive sellers that sell a homogenous good, and demand takes a constant-elasticity form. They find welfare is higher when the platform can use an ad valorem fee, but their result relies on the property that ad valorem fees help mitigate the double marginalization problem. Thus, their work complements ours, which assumes away any double marginalization problem by focusing on the case in which sellers are identical price competitors. In a similar vein, several studies (e.g., Foros et al. [2014]; Gaudin and White [2014a]; and Johnson [2017]) have explored the advantages of so-called agency model used by mass retailers such as Amazon, where the retailer lets suppliers (i.e., sellers) set final prices and receive a share of the revenue, which is equivalent to using a percentage fee. Like Shy and Wang [2011], they also show that the revenue-sharing used in the agency model has the advantage of mitigating double marginalization, but they differ by focusing on how the agency model affects retail prices compared with the traditional wholesale pricing model.

Our theory can also be used to justify the adoption of ad valorem taxes rather than unit (or specific) taxes in settings in which governments seek to maximize tax revenue (the so-called Leviathan hypothesis; see Brennan and Buchanan [1977, 1978]). In this case, the tax-revenue maximizing government is identical to a revenue-maximizing platform. Our results imply that an ad valorem tax regime welfare dominates a unit tax regime. Gaudin and White [2014b] obtain a similar result but in a very different setting, in which double marginalization rather than price discrimination is the key driving force.

Finally, our paper also contributes to the extensive literature on the welfare effects of monopolistic third-degree price discrimination (e.g., Schmalensee [1981]; Varian [1985]; Schwartz [1990]; Layson [1994]; Aguirre [2006, 2008]; Cowan [2007, 2016]; Aguirre et al. [2010]; and Chen and Schwartz [2015]). Aguirre et al. [2010] is particularly relevant. They focus on the case in which there are two markets that are always served and consider a general demand specification. Among the cases for which they obtain strong results is the case in which the demand function in each market has a constant curvature of inverse demand and demands are sufficiently close across the two markets. We study a special case of their specification in which all markets have the same constant curvature of inverse demand and in which inverse demand only varies by a multiplicative term across each market. On the other hand, we generalize their result by allowing for larger differences in inverse demand across the two markets. Our results also extend the findings of Malueg and Schwartz [1994], who consider a continuum of markets each having a linear demand, with inverse demand varying with a multiplicative term that is uniformly distributed. Moreover, in contrast to most studies in the existing literature, we go beyond purely theoretical discussions by calibrating our model to the data from Amazon’s marketplace and Visa’s signature debit cards. This allows us to provide quantitative evaluations of the welfare effects of price discrimination at those platforms based on the actual, highly skewed, distributions of goods traded on these platforms.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II sets out the model. Section III provides some analytical results while Section IV provides results based on a calibrated model of the Visa platform and the Amazon platform. Finally, Section V provides some brief concluding remarks.

CONCLUSION
Many platforms that facilitate transactions between buyers and sellers charge ad valorem fees in which fees depend on the transaction price set by sellers. Given these platforms do not incur significant costs that vary with transaction prices, their use of ad valorem fees has raised controversies about the efficiency of this practice. For policymakers who would want to align platform fees with costs but are concerned about directly regulating fee levels, it seems natural to consider regulating fee structures, such as banning platforms from using ad valorem fees. However, we have shown that such regulation tends to have negative welfare outcomes, including when we calibrate our model to data on sales of DVD’s on Amazon’s marketplace and data for Visa signature debit card transactions. Therefore, caution should be taken when policymakers consider this option. A similar result would also apply to a government that wanted to maximize tax revenue—welfare would be higher when it does so using an ad valorem tax. The key feature that drives these results is that when a market involves many different goods that vary widely in their costs and values, ad valorem fees and taxes represent an efficient form of price discrimination. In comparison, uniform fees or taxes could adversely affect low-cost low-value goods so that the total welfare is reduced.

There are several avenues for future research. In reality, there could be some substitution on the demand side across the different goods within the same market category (e.g. DVD’s), whereas for tractability we treated goods of different scale within a market category to be independent. It would be interesting to study how such substitution changes the merits of ad valorem fees. In a platform context, it would also be interesting to explore whether allowing for cross-group network effects changes the case for ad valorem fees. Finally, it would be interesting to try to redo our analysis in a setting with imperfect competition between sellers, which would potentially provide another reason to prefer ad valorem fees, so as to help to mitigate double marginalization.
